if it seemed that a painting of a woman
being rescued from a shipwreck by a
courageous man who's risking his life
would be filled with sentiment and
emotion but what's so wonderful to me
about Winslow Homer is the lack of that
sentiment we have this incredibly
dramatic moment but Homer has not
exploited it emotionally in fact he's
even hidden in the face of the hero
that's a remarkable decision when you
think about it the man who's saving this
woman's life his face is completely
obscured by this scarf that just happens
at this moment to have ripped in front
of his face but of course this isn't a
photograph so this incredible sense of a
kind of selfless heroism these paintings
by Homer will recognize is inherently
American and their themes I think still
resonate with us when you listen to
somebody who's performed a dramatic
rescue perhaps on the nightly news they
all sort of push the camera away there
is a way in which we want to be selfless
in these moments we have a real feeling
of watching this drama unfold the
emphasis is almost on the mechanics of
the rescue this was a new technology
that allowed for the rescue of people
from ships near the shore and you can
just make out the loose sail of
billowing in the upper left corner and
you can see people who are watching the
rescue all rocks at the upper right in
fact that rope bows down and we can feel
the weight of these figures as they
skirt with their feet as terrifying surf
the colors and the tones are so subdued
and in create a sense of the freezing
Menace of the water it's not just that
they're soaked through they don't have
much time that woman is unconscious and
close to freezing to death there is this
real sense of urgency so when we look at
the water we see grays and pale blues
and tones of white and lots of different
kinds of brush strokes from little dabs
of paint that suggest the water spring
upward to longer strokes that suggest
the force of the waves I actually love
that area just at the cliffs on the
upper right you can see the spray
dissolving even though solid blacks and
if you look at the waves immediately
below the cliffs you can see the
translucency
where the wave is very thin and the
light moves through it ok the man's
right foot in the water you feel it
dragging and the way it's slowing them
down is they move along this pulley
there's a real sense of the particular
that make this seem so immediate and I
love the way that water drips from that
cord somehow the paint seems wet as
though there were water spraying up from
below that the clothing that the figures
are wearing is soaked through in fact in
some ways this painting is a nude the
woman is wearing a dress and it's
absolutely proper but her outfit is so
laden with water that he follows the
contours of her body look at the drops
of water from her right hand he could
really paint if you follow her hips down
there's just a little bit of skin that's
exposed just above her knee and you see
a little bit perhaps of her petticoat
below her dress I can almost imagine a
19th century viewer wanting to pull that
down to retrieve her modesty this is
really typical of the subject that homer
painted later in his career when he
lived in me and this idea of man and the
forces of nature and the futility of
man's efforts in the face of nature
although in this case we do have a
successful strike now obviously Homer
didn't paint this on the beach watching
a rescue the painting is based loosely
about a fairly recent rescue off the
coast of New Jersey but was actually
posed in New York City and where he kept
his studio even after he had moved to
prutte snack this was the studio
building on West 10th Street
so imagine then his models up on the
roof and him drenching them with water
to make the effect just right he was
recognized as a brilliant painter in his
own day he was honored as the foremost
American painter